---
title: 'Mom & Mischievous Me'
date: Feb 2025
permalink: /posts/2025/02/blog-post-2/
tags:
  - Random Walk
  - Probability Theory
  - Stochasticity
---

When I was a child, I used to be so mischievous that my mom would sometimes say in Bengali, "jedike duchokh chai, sedike chole jabo."\\(^1\\) Few days ago when I was reading a book, I realized that what mom said at that time to me is called 'simple symmetric random walk'. As a kid those words from my mom didn't really scare me since I believed mom will come back. My belief didn't have any mathematical rationality in those days. So let's try to mathematically figure out if my confidence was justified or not!

**Footnote 1**: English Translation: I will go wherever my eyes take me.

Formally, the property which is going to be our property of interest is **Recurrence**. For a given probability space \\((\Omega,\mathcal{F},\mathbb{P})\\), let \\(\\{X_{n}\\}_{n\geq 0}\\) for some \\(n\in\mathbb{N}\\), be a Markov chain with transition matrix \\(P\\). Then

\\[
P_{i}(X_{n}=i\text{ for infinitely many }n)=1\text{ (means state $i$ is recurrent)},
\\]

\\[
P_{i}(X_{n}=i\text{ for infinitely many }n)=0\text{ (means state $i$ is transient)}.
\\]

Thus, a recurrent state is one to which you keep coming back and a transient state is one which you eventually leave for ever. Therefore the Markov chain that represents my mom's random walk should be recurrent if she is going to come back. And then only my confidence would be justified.

### Assumptions & Notations

- Consider earth to be grid therefore I can always write any instantaneous position of my mom to be \\((x,y)\\) where \\(x\\) denotes latitude and \\(y\\) denotes longitude. Hence I assume that my mom is performing random walk in \\(\mathbb{Z}^{2}\\).

- The movement of mom is either horizontal or vertical.

- \\(p^{(n)}_{ij}\\) denotes the probability of moving from \\(i\\)th state to \\(j\\)th state in \\(n\\) steps \\(n\in\mathbb{N}\\). Transition probability matrix contains all such combinations of movements from one state to the other.

- Define random variable \\(T_{i}\\) to be the _first passage time_ to state \\(i\\) by,
- 
\\[T_{i}(\omega):=\inf\\{n\geq 1:X_{n}(\omega)=i\\},\qquad\text{where }\inf\\{\phi\\}\to\infty.\\]

We then inductively define \\(r\\)th passage time of state \\(i\\) to be \\(T^{(r)}_{i}\\) by 

$$T^{(0)}_{i}(\omega)=0,\quad \quad T^{(1)}_{i}(\omega)=T_{i}(\omega)$$

and, for \\(r=0,1,2..\\),
$$T^{(r+1)}_{i}(\omega)=\inf\{n\geq T^{(r)}_{i}(\omega)+1 : X_{n}(\omega)= i\}.$$

- There is a theorem which states the following dichotomy holds : 
  1. if \\(P_{i}(T_{i}<\infty)=1\\), then \\(i\\) is recurrent and \\(\sum\limits_{n\in\mathbb{N}}p^{(n)}_{ii}\to\infty\\),
  2. if \\(P_{i}(T_{i}<\infty)<1\\), then \\(i\\) is transient and \\(\sum\limits_{n\in\mathbb{N}}p^{(n)}_{ii}<\infty\\).

In particular, every state is either transient or recurrent.

### Justification of Confidence

For the justification of my confidence, at first we need to show the result that a simple symmetric random walk in \\(\mathbb{Z}\\) is recurrent. The simple symmetric random walk on \\(\mathbb{Z}\\) where probability of going to either side of \\(\mathbb{Z}\\) is equal (that is \\(0.5\\)). Suppose we start at \\(0\\). It is clear that we cannot return to \\(0\\) after an odd number of steps, so

\\[
p_{00}^{(2n+1)}=0\text{ for all }n\in\mathbb{N}.
\\]

Any given sequence of steps of length \\(2n\\) from \\(0\\) to \\(0\\) occurs with probability \\(\left(\frac{1}{2}\right)^{n}\left(\frac{1}{2}\right)^{n}\\), there being \\(n\\) steps up(right) and \\(n\\) steps down(left) and vice-versa, and the number of such sequences is the number of ways of choosing the \\(n\\) steps up from \\(2n\\). Thus

\\[
p_{00}^{(2n)}=\binom{2n}{n}\left(\frac{1}{2}\right)^{n}\left(\frac{1}{2}\right)^{n}=\binom{2n}{n}\left(\frac{1}{4}\right)^{n}
\\]

Stirling's formula provides a good approximation to \\(n!\\) for large \\(n\\): it is known that -

\\[
n!\sim A\sqrt{n}\left(\frac{n}{e}\right)^{n}\text{ as }n\to\infty\text{ for some }A\in[1,\infty)
\\]

For the \\(n\\)-step transition probabilities we obtain

\\[
p_{00}^{(2n)}=\frac{(2n)!}{(n!)^{2}}\left(\frac{1}{4}\right)^{n}\sim\frac{1}{A\sqrt{n/2}}=\frac{\sqrt{2}}{A\sqrt{n}}\text{ (as }n\to\infty)
\\]

For some \\(N\in\mathbb{N}\\) and all \\(n\geq N\\), we have

\\[
p_{00}^{(2n)}\geq\frac{1}{2A\sqrt{n}}\implies\sum_{n=N}^{\infty}p_{00}^{(2n)}\geq\frac{1}{2A}\sum_{n=N}^{\infty}\frac{1}{\sqrt{n}}\to\infty
\\]

which shows that the random walk is recurrent. This proves the first part of the proof. Now the simple symmetric random walk on \\(\mathbb{Z}^{2}\\) has transition probabilities

\\[
p_{ij}=\begin{cases}1/4&\text{ if }|i-j|=1,\\ 0&\text{ otherwise. }\end{cases}
\\]

Suppose we start at \\((0,0)\\). Let us call the walk \\(X_{n}\\) and write \\(X_{n}^{+}\\) and \\(X_{n}^{-}\\) for the orthogonal projections of \\(X_{n}\\) on the diagonal lines \\(y=\pm x\\).

Then \\(X_{n}^{+}\\) and \\(X_{n}^{-}\\) are independent simple symmetric random walks on \\(2^{-1/2}\mathbb{Z}\\) and \\(X_{n}=0\\) if and only if \\(X_{n}^{+}=0=X_{n}^{-}\\). This makes it clear that for \\(X_{n}\\) we have

\\[
p_{00}^{(2n)}=\left(\binom{2n}{n}\left(\frac{1}{2}\right)^{2n}\right)^{2}\sim\frac{2}{A^{2}n}\text{ (as }n\to\infty)
\\]

\\[
\implies\sum_{n\in\mathbb{N}}p_{00}^{(n)}\to\infty\qquad(\text{ since }\sum_{n\in\mathbb{N}}\frac{1}{n}\text{ diverges})
\\]

Therefore we conclude that the walk is recurrent. Hence the confidence I had as a kid turns out to be mathematically justified. This completes our proof.[1] 

### References

- [1] J. R. Norris, _Markov chains_. No. 2, Cambridge university press, 1998.

